Docs(docfx): update docfx build locally guide and apply xref links (#19722)
unoplatform/uno: doc/articles/uno-development/docfx.md

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD001 -->

# The Uno documentation website and DocFX

*[TOC]: Table of Contents
*[HTML]: Hypertext Markup Language
*[docs]: documentation

> *[doc file]: markdown file

Reviewer: to review this part

Author: > to review this part

I did check it out at the staged docs and to me that behavior is quite suspicious... From their documentation thats definitely telling it would replace those parts, but somehow that does not apply to uno docs? Is that a markdown issue on their side or dies that only not apply in uno platform docs? In that or the other case, it seems to be not working as expected, so this docfx.json part should be decided to be cleared from there to avoid such things happening from my point of view...

Author: Deleted the tags on commit #ce5524a8b29397ba69e61cd3345971ae29b451c4.htm

Uno Platform's docs website uses [DocFX](https://dotnet.github.io/docfx/) to convert Markdown (.md) files in the [articles folder](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/tree/master/doc/articles) into [HTML files](xref:Uno.Documentation.Intro).

## Linking to the TOC

Normally when you add a new doc file, you also add it to [articles/toc.yml](../toc.yml). This allows it to show up in the left sidebar TOC on the docs website.

### Checking Links in the TOC

To ensure that your file is correctly linked and nothing is missing, you can use the [Toc Checker](xref:Uno.Contributing.check-toc.Overview). This helps identify unreferenced files and invalid links automatically.

## DocFX-flavored Markdown

DocFX supports extended Markdown syntaxes that are treated specially when converting to html.

### Formatted blockquotes

You can use [specially-styled blockquotes](https://dotnet.github.io/docfx/spec/docfx_flavored_markdown.html#note-warningtipimportant), to call special attention to particular information.

The following note types are supported, including a sample to each one:

```markdown
> [!NOTE]

> > Information the user should notice even if skimming.

Author: applied in [this commit](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/pull/19722/commits/88110489ef82fa1b5f392ec128ec6f6bd1864758)

```

> [!NOTE]

> > Information the user should notice even if skimming.

Author: applied in [this commit](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/pull/19722/commits/88110489ef82fa1b5f392ec128ec6f6bd1864758)

```markdown
> [!TIP]

> > Optional information to help a user be more successful.

Author: applied in [this commit](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/pull/19722/commits/88110489ef82fa1b5f392ec128ec6f6bd1864758)

```

> [!TIP]

> > Optional information to help a user be more successful.

Author: applied in [this commit](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/pull/19722/commits/88110489ef82fa1b5f392ec128ec6f6bd1864758)

```markdown
> [!IMPORTANT]

> > Essential information required for user success.

Author: applied in [this commit](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/pull/19722/commits/88110489ef82fa1b5f392ec128ec6f6bd1864758)

```

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > Essential information required for user success.

Author: applied in [this commit](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/pull/19722/commits/88110489ef82fa1b5f392ec128ec6f6bd1864758)

```markdown
> [!CAUTION]

> > Negative potential consequences of an action.

Author: applied in [this commit](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/pull/19722/commits/88110489ef82fa1b5f392ec128ec6f6bd1864758)

```

> [!CAUTION]

> > Negative potential consequences of an action.

Author: applied in [this commit](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/pull/19722/commits/88110489ef82fa1b5f392ec128ec6f6bd1864758)

```markdown
> [!WARNING]

> > Dangerous certain consequences of an action.

Author: applied in [this commit](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/pull/19722/commits/88110489ef82fa1b5f392ec128ec6f6bd1864758)

```

> [!WARNING]

> > Dangerous certain consequences of an action.

Author: applied in [this commit](https://github.com/unoplatform/uno/pull/19722/commits/88110489ef82fa1b5f392ec128ec6f6bd1864758)

```

Html output:
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD051 -->
# [WinUI](#tab/tabid-1)

`Microsoft.UI.Xaml.FrameworkElement`

# [UWP](#tab/tabid-2)

`Windows.UI.Xaml.FrameworkElement`
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD51 -->
---

> [!NOTE]
> Use `---` in the Markdown sample is Important, to not include more Content in the tabbed area than actually wanted, but will not be rendered in the served documentation.

> > It is possible to use `***` alternatively for the same task.

Author: In some doc files e.g. the templates, there is html tags used for seperation. Does that stand in relation to this formatting possibility? Maybe samples for this not direct markup format would be good to have included for completness?

> > It is possible to use `***` alternatively for the same task.

Author: applyed changes, to be checked at CI staged docs preview

1. Open the `Uno.UI-Tools.slnf` solution filter in the `src` folder with Visual Studio.
2. Edit the properties of the `Uno.UwpSyncGenerator` project. Under the 'Debug' tab, set Application arguments to "doc".
3. Set `Uno.UwpSyncGenerator` as startup project and run it. It may fail to generate the full implemented views content; if so, it should still nonetheless generate stubs so that DocFX can run successfully.
4. Open a Terminal at the Root Directory of your locally cloned Uno Repository.
5. Install docfx globally: `dotnet tool install -g docfx`

> 6. Run the following command: `docfx build doc/docfx.json` and attach any nested foldername you want by adding `-o your-nested-output-path`, default: `_site`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Run the following command: `docfx build doc/docfx.json` and attach any nested folder name you want by adding `-o your-nested-output-path`, default: `_site`
```

2. Open a Developer Command Prompt for Visual Studio (2019 or 2022)
3. Go to the uno\build folder (not the uno\src\build folder)
4. Run the `run-doc-generation.cmd` script; make sure to follow the instructions

## Import Uno Extensions and Tools docs

> [!INCLUDE ../external/  <!--https://github.com/unoplatform/uno.extensions/blob/main/doc/README.md -->]

Reviewer: to review and update

Author: updated link, to be reviewed in Docs preview, my docfx is not willing to serve locally and writing way to much stacktrace, more than the terminal can handle (set to already 9000 lines!)
